Hi, everyone. Thank you so much for joining us today. Welcome to the RStudio Enterprise
Community Meetup. I'm Rachel calling in from Boston. Well, really Dorchester today. Today,
we're going to learn more and chat with each other about a crucially important topic,
accessibility. So ultimately, making sure that our data products can be used by all users.
If you've just joined now, feel free to introduce yourselves through the chat window. Say hello,
maybe where you're calling in from. I do also want to make note that if you want to turn on live
transcription during the meetup, you can do so in the zoom bar below where it says more.
To go through a brief agenda, we'll have some short introductions and welcome everyone to the
meetup. We'll have a presentation by Maya, A11y in R or ally in R, we were just talking about how
you say that. Followed by a presentation by Mara on the high charts accessibility module.
And then a lot of time for Q&A and open discussion to share resources with each other as well.
So after the presentation, we'll have lots of time for Q&A, but can also ask a few right after each
of the presentations too. Just a reminder that this meetup will be recorded and shared to the
R studio YouTube. So if you do ask questions in the zoom chat, you'll be part of that recording.
If you want to ask questions anonymously, you can do so as well. We have a Slido link for that,
and I'll put that in the chat window here in just a moment.
But for anybody who's joining for the first time, a special welcome to you all. This is a
friendly and open meetup environment for teams to share the work that they're doing within their
organizations, teach lessons, learn, network with each other, really just to allow us all to learn
from each other. So thank you all so much for making this a welcoming community too.
We really want this to be a space where everybody can participate and we can hear from everyone.
I always like to reiterate this, that we love to hear from everyone, no matter your level of
experience in the field too. I'll share a few other links in the chat window too. If you do
ever have suggestions or want to speak at one of these in the future, love to hear from you.
But with that, that's enough from me. Thank you all again for joining us. I'd love to turn it over
to our first speaker, Maya Gans. Maya is a data visualization engineer at Atoras Research,
where she develops custom applications using R and JavaScript.
I'll stop my share and turn it over to you. Awesome. Thanks so much.
Hey, everyone. I am so excited to talk about this topic today. But a couple caveats first.
One, this is a topic that I am super passionate about as of recent. I am not an expert in this,
but I think that it is imperative that we all make considerations for accessibility. And
the second thing is that I personally, when creating this talk or creating websites,
visualizations, whatever it is, I have my own data visualization blind spots
and so, yeah. That's just how I'm I just wanted to caveat that. That said,
this is a really cool topic and I think we all need to be considering it. As Rachel mentioned,
the talk is called A11T or Ally or Accessibility in R. There are 11 letters between A and Y in
accessibility and that is long and that is why it is abbreviated as such. And again,
I am not an expert, but Sarah Alfosheim is and their blog posts are incredible,
amazing resources. I will be sharing these slides and all the links are clickable therein.
And Sarah, their blog post goes over has a blog post where they go over 10 do's and don'ts in
data visualization. I figured I could adapt those into the R ecosystem. So,
their blog post begins saying accessibility should always be a focus when designing products
and the same goes with working with data visualizations and graphs. So, the main tenet
of the internet is that everyone should have access to it. And likewise, we should be thinking
about data visualizations in the same way. Thinking about our audience,
who is consuming them, and they should be consumable by all.
So, I'll just jump into our first tenet here. Don't rely on color to explain the data. So,
I just made a quick bar chart here of where they're grouped by some category. You'll see
the code on the left-hand side there. And there are many applications to do this,
but here I've linked Cobliss. You can throw in any image into this application and it will show
you the various forms of color blindness. And you'll see here, like, this one specifically,
you have that middle bar and the top colors are really close together. So, throwing your
data visualizations into software like this is a quick and easy win to think about how you're
going to leverage different colors. Okay. I clicked on that link. Cool. So, what can we do?
There is a really cool package, ggpattern, which this is my first time playing with it.
You can, if your company has a really strict color palette that is failing some of these color
blind tests, you can leverage different patterns. So, here we have different patterns denoting the
different categories as well. So, leveraging this with the redundancy of color can help to bridge
that gap. Okay. Here is for anyone in this talk that knows me, being extra is kind of my MO.
So, the second tenet is don't use very bright or low contrast colors. So, I obviously had to make
a custom shiny input widget where you can scroll to see the text color on the background color
and if it passes the WCAG standards, there are AA and AAA standards, which are the less and more
strict. If your website is not passing the less strict one, boom. Bad. So, there's color checkers
online, but again, me being extra, I made a little package and made a contrast checker. So,
because this is an R thing. We can talk about color math. That's a little bit beyond the scope
of the talk. But feel free to play with this in the slides.
All right. Tenet three. This is a really good one and honestly very fun to play with. Don't
hide important data behind interactions. When thinking about accessibility, something that we
have to think about is how many consumers of data are doing so on mobile. That is their primary
means of getting and consuming data. So, on the left hand side, I have a plotly data visualization
where on hover, I'm seeing some drill down. The value of these of the chunks here that make the
categories that comprise the whole bar. That's really cool. But on mobile, we don't really have
a hover. So, what we can do is leverage click events. So, now when I click here, imagine on
mobile, you have your plot. And then under it, I have some container that will populate with
that metadata. And what I'm doing here is clicking on each of these categories. So,
for anyone who wants to geek out over the code, on the left hand side, all I want you to focus on
is the hover template. I created a custom hover template in plotly. And then for the click event,
which is a little more involved, you have to create that container element. So, I made that
container and called it plotly output. So, that's just empty. And then using the HTML widgets
package, I attached an on render function for the plotly object where on click, you grab that element
and then shove in the data that you get on click, which plotly helps you to leverage that
click event. So, going over the specifics of this code is like my bread and butter. I love this
stuff and I love to live in this world and thinking about how desktop consumers are different
than mobile consumers. But the specifics of the code, a little bit overboard for this talk. That
said, if anyone wants to reach out to me, Twitter, LinkedIn, whatever, I am psyched to talk about this
stuff. Okay. Number four. Don't overwhelm the user with information. When you Google dashboard fatigue,
I think the first thing that comes up is Sean Lopp of our studio, his talk on dashboard fatigue and
how to mitigate that. What is dashboard fatigue? When you throw it is as a data scientist with a
statistical background and not a UI background, it is very tempting to shove all the things
into the dashboard because we have access to all the things. But Sean urges us to reel it back
and the goal of data science, of a data science team, is to help organizations or individuals
make better decisions informed by data. Don't show me everything about everything.
What is it the user needs? Only show them that. And then when designing a dashboard, it's important
to think about leading with the key data. Make that bold and font size 100 or make that visual
the biggest one. And then two other considerations for not overwhelming the user is to limit the view,
the scope, and then let the user, this is, this is like the power of Shiny, right? Where we can
let the user change how they filter the data and their focus, slice and dice the data in different
ways. Hand that power over to the user rather than just saying, here's 700 plots, have fun.
And then finally, a favorite of mine that I see in the wild a lot is when people don't use
consistent language and color. So, example, plot A and plot B are, have the same X axis,
but plot A says person 1, 2, 3, and plot B says 1, 2, 3. They're literally the same thing,
but you're not using the same, like, nomenclature. Bad. The second thing is
using consistent color. So, in plot A, person 1, 2, 3 is red, green, blue, and then in plot B,
you're using a gray scale, but those colors mean the same thing across plots. Try to think of your
dashboard as telling a data story and being cohesive throughout that story. So, that kind of
covers four there. Number five, use accessibility tools when designing. So, Rachel mentioned that
later we can all geek out and share links, because that is the point of these meetups,
for us to all learn more. So, the biggest link here is the web content accessibility guidelines.
This is the tome of all the things that you should be considering for accessibility when
creating a website, and then you can just glean nuggets from that when creating data
visualizations. Here's a different color contrast validator than the shiny one that I created.
Google Lighthouse is an incredible tool that you can run on any website. I recommend you,
if you're using, like, a package down or blog down or whatever down, run this on your websites,
and it will check it gives you a grade if you're and it checks things like the color
contrast checker that I created. It checks things like do all your images have all text tags,
and it'll walk you through how to make your score 100. So, Google Lighthouse is an incredible tool,
and then there's the 11T project checklist, which is a great checklist to mentally or literally
go through when creating a data visualization. Make sure that you cross off everything and
consider everything outside of your own personal biases when creating a data visualization.
So, all these links live in the top. Okay. Use patterns and shapes in addition to color. This
one is a little we talked about a little bit in point one. Here in the code, I have the color
is equal to category, but use some redundancy there. I also added the shape is equal to the
category. This might seem redundant to you, but it could be really helpful to others. Simple,
effective, just do it. Using labels and legends. So, it is perfectly adequate to use the ggplot
default legend that is going to create this color by person legend for you, but I urge you
to be creative and let your plot readers be as lazy as possible. I love a transition where I
get to read this line, and boom, I'm right into person three. I don't need my eyes are doing the
least amount of work possible. So, this is just a simple example of how we can use our creativity
to leverage labels and legends, and I included the code here because you have to do some
shenanigans with shifting the margins in order to add text outside of the plot. I thought that was
a fun little neat trick. So, happy to go over that code. It exists here for you to leverage.
All right. This is a slide that is a talk in and of itself, and lends itself to Mara's talk,
but there is a library called Chartability, and this is a plot I did not make. It was made by
Frank Elvasky. I believe this package is from Visa, but do not quote me on that. This will link
out to the observable notebook where this plot was created. In all of my examples till this point,
I've been using pngs with alt text to describe the data visualization, and when writing alt text,
you want to really think about, if you were to call your friend on the phone and describe the
data visualization, that is what you want to put. Don't just put, this is a bar graph. I didn't get
anything from that, right? So, what is awesome about the internet is that it uses HTML, which
is a hierarchical markdown language, and also learning HTML is a little bit beyond the scope
of this, but I just want to show how this library, because it's not a png, elements are clickable,
and here what I did is I clicked, or you can hit tab to focus on the whole plot, and then when you
I'm clearly not a keyboard navigator. When you hit enter, so HTML is hierarchical, so
hitting tab will find sibling elements. Hitting enter, you'll go into the tree,
so here I've hit enter to go into the plot itself, and then I can hit enter again,
and the screen readers will read to me that this bar segment is of count four, category,
current status, and it's about the topics covered, and because this four is a sibling element
to the four, I can now hit my left and right arrow keys to navigate to the 41.
This experience of using the keyboard and not using a mouse at all, I urge everyone to do this,
so I am very much a mac user, but just going over to a blank slate google page here, if I hit
command f5, welcome to voiceover, voiceover speaks descriptions of items on the screen,
and can be used to control the computer using only your keyboard. If you already know how to
use voiceover, press the v key now. If you want to learn how to use voice, so we can use f5 to use
the voiceover. So I am a super voiceover novice. I couldn't even tab from zoom, which is what I'm
using into this actual google window, and that is why I urge people to play with this and navigate
through using only a keyboard, and at the very least, if you are a shiny app developer, if you
can take from this talk to tab through your application and see what that user workflow
looks like, that would be a huge win on my end. So again, I urge people to explore using a screen
reader and how that's a new way to experience using a computer for you, as it is for me. It can
be incredibly, it's, you want to consider the things that people are going to be tabbing through,
maybe leveraging shortcuts in order to make tabbing easier for them, and thinking about
keyboard shortcuts and all that kind of stuff is actually really fun. As a side example, if you use
a screen reader on twitter, the first thing it reads to you is an element that a sighted user
is never going to interact with. It reads out all the keyboard shortcuts to use when navigating
through the website, so that you can leverage all the things that someone who's using a mouse
could do. Okay, so that is a whole side of using a screen reader that I'm clearly need some work
doing, but is a whole other world of experiencing the internet. All right, number nine is providing
context and explaining your visualization, and I, the way that I did this is using the annotate
function, which is your best friend here, to add labels. I realize this text is super small,
but at the bottom of the plot, I added all time low, and at the highest point in the plot, I added
record high. This gives the user some broader context for if this, if you have a graph of some
snapshot in time, but this is a record high temperature in the past decade or whatever, like
it's, it leveraged text to really highlight those important narratives. Another example here is I've
created a bar plot, and you immediately are going to go to the maroon segment here, because I've
leveraged both color and some text, which I very creatively wrote, some event worth highlighting,
because that's where your eye is just going to immediately go there. So again, providing context,
explaining the visualization, thinking about your audience, what they know, what they don't know,
and really trying to communicate that story. And then my last, by my, I mean Sarah's, last
tenet here is to focus on accessibility during user interviews. So this applies more to creating
dashboards and shiny apps than it does to a single static data visualization, but you still can,
all, you should always be applying this first part in the preparation of creating anything.
You should give user personas disabilities. So first of all, what is a user persona? When creating
a website or visualization or whatever that you want people that are not yourself to consume,
it is really helpful to create detailed narratives of people who are going to be using this
application. Sarah, who's the head of HR, blah, blah, blah, blah, she's going to be navigating
through the application to do this, and Bob, who's this, is going to be doing that, right?
So flushing out those stories will help you to live outside of your subjective biases when
creating these applications. The next step after preparing is recruiting. When getting people to
participate in any of your user studies, you want to make sure you set one-on-one time.
You might want to consider a ride share or something like that. You don't know what
people's transportation needs are. And then finally, you want to inquire about the assistive
technology used, which kind of goes into my last one here when you're conducting the interview.
If I were to take a poll for all the people in this room, just the different mechanical keyboards
that people use, we all have vastly different setups and preferences, and everyone in programming
is opinionated, so people are going to have different hardware, so if you create an application
with one kind of accessibility hardware in mind, and then someone brings in a joystick,
you need to account for that, and maybe also have some, like, AV people there to help you with that,
because even though I'm a programmer, I don't know how to use a projector, so that could be helpful.
And then lastly, you want to just consider that when scheduling these kind of interviews and people
work using your application, that these might take longer, because as you saw with the
screen reader, there's a lot that goes on there. So again, I'll give out these slides. There's
links abound. I hope that I was able to impart some wisdom here, and I hope that if you are new
to employing Ally techniques into your data visualization, that you share with us kind of
what you learn, and yeah, I'm excited to be here and talk with you all.
Thank you so much, Maya. I always like to say we're all clapping, even though you can't hear us
right now. We can use little Zoom reactions, though. Thank you so much for all of that. I see
there's a lot of questions that have started to come in through both the chat as well as Slido,
so I'm going to do my best to navigate those, but one of the anonymous questions was the principle
of contrast checker is also applicable for spatial data map visualizations. Is that true?
Sure. Mara, you're nodding.
So we think so. I think that was a statement, not a question.
It was. I read it as it was written, but there was a question mark at the end,
so let me rephrase it. Well, it's also there's different contrast that you want to look for.
Contrast checkers are for like the ratio of contrast for text as opposed to color blindness
checkers, which look at what people with different vision situations see. So they're
a little bit different, but there are checkers for both, and there are ones that are specifically
for maps. Awesome. Yeah, I see Caleb put in the chat to cartographer here, and I would say yes.
Awesome. I just want to caveat too, sorry, that this is all like a learning experience, I guess,
for me, and thinking about outside of your subjective biases, like if there is a gradient
that you're using, a default gradient, and you don't know how to create a custom gradient,
then leverage all text. Leverage descriptions. You know what I mean? So it's okay if you're not
up to the highest standards in WCAG, but then use the other tools if you can. You know what I mean?
That's a great point, Maya. Let me go over to a question from the chat over here on Zoom.
Let's see. I see Nils had asked, are you using a custom
shareagen theme? And I always say that word wrong.
I live for customizing my shareagen slides, and yes, I am. I use a combination of Canva,
creating background images, and importing them into the slides. Talk about extra.
Happy to go down that rabbit hole outside of the scope of this talk, though.
Awesome. Thank you, Maya. Let me just see if there, actually, if anyone has one more question
before we go over to Mara, we will have lots of time for questions after too. Feel free to just
raise your hand on Zoom too. I see Francisco, you just asked a question in the chat if you'd want to
unmute yourself and ask live too. I think I turned on the ability to unmute yourself.
I can read it too. The question was, I wonder if Maya could quickly talk about
her process of creating a visualization and adding accessibility layers. Do you follow
the principles and order? That's an awesome question. Again,
harkening back to my caveat of this being a very new world for me, but I find this incredibly fun
and important. In the slide deck, there's a link to a checklist. So, that is what I've recently
been considering. And then I use a combination. I always use Lighthouse checks when I'm creating
shiny apps to make sure that all my HTML elements are passing everything. But I think,
yeah, that's a really good question. I think it's a matter of synthesizing people who are
smarter than me, their information, and I'm happy to share, like, through blog posts and meetings
like this as I learn more. But I think that checklist is a good place to start.
Perfect. Thank you so much, Maya. I'd love to turn it over to Mara for our second presentation.
And again, we'll have other time for questions for both Maya and Mara at the end and open
discussion too. So, I will say, if you're using Slido to ask questions, it'd be really helpful,
or actually, if you're using Zoom chat too, really helpful to include Mara or Maya's name
if the question is directed to either one of them too. But thank you so much to introduce
our next speaker. We have Mara Ivryk. And Mara is a developer advocate at RStudio.
I'll turn it over to you, Mara. Awesome. Oh, wait.
Hi. Can you hear me? I can hear you and I can see your slides.
Awesome. Great. So, I am using Quarto, which you'll learn about in future times,
or you have already learned about. Anyway, this is my first time doing this with Quarto. And
I will say, writing this very brief talk took me way longer than probably any other talk I've
ever written. And really not for lack of materials, I did write a five-part series of
blog posts covering this topic. But in part because I've fallen down the accessibility
rabbit hole, right? There's so much to learn and it's really interesting. And I noticed somebody
commented on Maya's font at one point. They were like, oh, thanks for using a monospace font. You
have no idea how much time I spent being like, okay, well, there's Atkinson hyper legible,
which is good for distinguishing characters, but that's not as good. That's good for open
dyslexic, but it's not as good for cognitive disabilities where you want to have familiar
looking shapes. There's a lot. Accessibility is not one size fits all at all. And I ended up,
talk about stealing from experts. I'm using Noto Sans, which is what they use on the Ally project
and the World Wide Web Consortium on Web Accessibility Initiative for their slides and
presentations. If it was good enough for them, it's good enough for me. But I just noticed that.
Anyway. Rachel kind of covered this about me. My name is Mara, developer advocate at RStudio.
I live in Missoula where it is a balmy 14 degrees right now. Things I did not create.
Hi, Charter. That's good old Joshua who is an R package developer. Hi, Charts. That's done by
HiSoft. And just so you know, that's not a complete list of the things that I have not created.
But I wasn't going to list all of those. Anyway. So, HiCharts, it is a JavaScript charting library
based on SVG that makes it easy for developers to create interactive and accessible charts.
The SVG part comes in quite a lot. But so, I want to disambiguate what the two things are.
And HiCharter is an R wrapper for the HiCharts JavaScript library and its modules.
And how did I fall into this? So, Sylvia wrote a great post on resources for data vis accessibility.
And they are these general and R specific resources on how and why to make accessible
data visualizations. And at the time of its first writing, the HiCharts accessibility module didn't
seem to be working with the HiCharter package. And I used HiCharter before. And I kind of
remembered. I was like, you know what? I'm not a JavaScript developer. But if you can make it work
in HiCharts, you can usually make it work in HiCharter. So, I decided to see if I could do it.
So, my motivate there were a couple of GitHub issues people had filed. And this was my great
motivating example was somebody filed an issue saying that keyboard navigation wasn't working.
And you know what's really fun, by the way? Using keyboard navigation
when you're trying to present oh, I did. I was doing it. Right. When you're trying to present
a slide deck that uses keyboard navigation. But trust me, I am using my
my keyboard right now. You can see. Look, I did make it work. And look, I can even use my keyboard
to do something like view it as a data table. Which turns out people want that. And then I
could go back and hide the data. Now I'm using my own mouse. I could export the data. I could
export it as SVG. Hooray. I made it work. And this was not the end of the story. Oh, shoot. Now
I'm like stuck in. There we go. Sorry. Anyway. So, if we take my journey of the starting point,
reading Sylvia's fantastic post, the end point, reading a five part series on how to do these
things with increasingly complex visualizations. The posts have these accessible examples with
High Charter and all this R code which is pretty long. But in the middle here is me learning a
bunch of useful things. Non-coder framework specific. A lot of great things from High
Charter but also things that apply in general. And this talk will be covering that middle point.
Sorry. I know everyone's going to be disappointed by me not reading a lot of code aloud. But,
yeah. It's there for you to peruse. And I also I also want to tell you some of the general
principles that can be applied from High Charts and High Charter to your visualizations in general.
So, a little bit of background on High Charts and accessibility. So, one thing which is this is not
to say that it's perfect. But High Charts is not free for commercial use. And it's like a key
selling point for them. Tons of companies have to comply with accessibility like 508 or regulations
in the U.S. And it's a key part of their business model. A lot of companies were already using them
before this became the case. But that's a thing. So, some of their features very much this is like
not at all exhaustive is keyboard navigation, screen reader optimization, low vision features,
sonification, voice input, tactile export. So, as you can already probably tell there,
that actually accommodates a lot of different types of accessibility needs. So, for example,
voice input for people who have trouble using the keyboard. Which is another population. It turns
out people who use screen readers have really different preferences. I'll get into more detail
about that later. So, the background on this is that High Charter sorry High Charts did a
collaboration with Elsevier. And Ted Gees is from Elsevier. Sorry if I'm saying it wrong.
And both of whom they're members of the Data Vis Accessibility Advocacy and Advisory Group.
But they kind of got together to Elsevier was actually already using High Charts. And
Ted had a lot of background in user testing. And they embarked on this journey of kind of
developing this product together through iterative both accessibility expert testing
and user testing. And that's really key. So, this is just one quotation from an article
about the project that they did from Lucy Greco who's a web accessibility evangelist. She's one
of their test users. And she's been blind since birth. She said, you know, kind of,
this innovation allows me to interact with the chart and understand the relationships of all
the components of the chart to all the other components rather than just getting a description
of the chart. And that is enabled by the fact that these are SVG. And I full disclosure, like,
don't know a ton about SVG. They've made it work. And you can drill down in it. I would never be
able to come up with that. I'm not an expert. And I also don't have user testing. So, this is one of
those cases where sometimes using the right tool teaches you a lot. And again, accessibility is
hard. So, I like using this tool. So, more background, if you're curious. They did the two
of them have presented at the CSUN assistive technology conference is one of the biggest
assistive technology conferences they've presented several times. And I really highly recommend this
video interview. I know this is like a very oh, can you see that I'm hovering over that?
Can you see it now? Yes, I can. Okay. Cool. There are a lot of links in here that I hope that you
take a look at that. But that video interview is one of them. It's short and it really tells you a
lot. Other collaborations that HighCharts has done with the Georgia Text Notification Lab,
they made a completely open source HighCharts Notification Studio.
Because of how I'm navigating through things, if I try to open it, things are going to go a
little crazy. So, I'm not going to. But very neat to check out if you want to later. All right. So,
some of the features. So, keyboard navigation. Users are able to navigate and interact with
several components, right? So, the data points, the chart menu, and other chart controls using
the keyboard only. So, this kind of goes beyond just being able to get to the chart or around
the webpage on the whole. This means that they can interact with individual elements.
And an example of that, this one I didn't make. And again, I'm going to have trouble showing the
keyboard navigation awesomeness from presenter view. Let me see if I can get it going by
unclicking this and then using my keyboard. I can't. But trust me that you can navigate
these things. And also, you'll have the slides so you can see for yourselves.
And I did not create that one. But here is one that I did recreate in R with HighCharter.
And one of the things that they found in their research, by the way, this since I made this,
they've changed their default color scheme to be more accessible, by the way. But it also uses dual
encoding. As you can see, there are shapes and patterns that are used for each of these lines.
I'm navigating with a mouse right now because of my keyboard issues. But what they found in
their research was that am I doing this? Yes. Okay. Now I'm using my keyboard. What they found
in their research and this allows you to navigate individual series. And I'll show you a screen reader
demo in a second. But one of the things that they found was that for some users, they preferred
using a data table when the data was relatively simple. So, you're able to view data table,
which doesn't work out that well on a slide. I have to use my mouse. I apologize. And you can
export the data if that's what you want. Again, accessibility is not a one size fits all type of
situation. Sonification. I did not create this one. But here is a cool demo of it.
That allows somebody who otherwise wouldn't be able to kind of take in that information
for themselves to hear patterns without it being described to them. Which was a feature that
people wanted. And I know we had a low vision user accessibility expert who showed his experience
in what it was like to get patterns from sonification. And that was incredibly meaningful
to him. For me, I'm like, ah, I can't remember how this goes. But if you're for some people,
that is a great way to get the information. I also wanted to show you an example of voice
oh, sorry. Voice input. I had to embed this so that I can have my closed captions on for you.
So, this video demonstrates using Dragon version 15 to navigate interactive features of high charts
by announcing the accessible name of buttons and controls. Click JAWS. Click JAWS.
Click voiceover. Click voiceover.
All right. So, I'm going to end it there. But that is using voice input to click and drill down on
data series. Which is pretty neat. Screen reader accessibility. Now, this is one part of it.
This is for screen reader accessibility for individual points. So, one of the things that
they found, again, with user studies was that rather than having these really long descriptions,
a lot of users preferred that they get the information only when they need it. So,
and I apologize if that was more video situation. So, this allows a user who can use their keyboard
to hear what is happening at each point. One. December 2010, 34.8%. NVDA. One. December
2010, 20.2%. Voiceover. Two. May 2012, 30.7%. Voiceover. Three. January 2014.
Cool. And oh, by the way, you might note here, and this will come up more later, is that this
is actually these are the most common desktop screen readers. And they as you'll find out as
I continue, they do not all they all have platform specific and sometimes browser specific
accessibility APIs. So, when you're testing something, it's not as easy as being like,
use a screen reader. They actually all work a little bit differently. So, testing is pretty
extensive. Is it perfect? I don't know. It's it I can't say. But it's pretty darn good. Is it
impressive? Yes. Is it way better than anything I'd be able to do by myself? Absolutely. So,
why is it so impressive? Well, this gets at what I was talking about before. So, assistive
technology and the accessibility tree. So, this is an example with an application. So, an application
is broken down into something called an accessibility tree. And those nodes can be
grouping nodes that are hierarchical or they can be individual elements that you can interact with
in different ways. So, it could be something that you could click, that could have a state,
that could have a role. And again, this is a platform specific accessibility API that creates
that accessibility tree. And then that goes from the assistive technology to the user.
So, I guess I'll go over this quickly just because I've taken a longer time than I thought. So,
an example, this would be with using VoiceOver. The app translates an element into an accessibility
node. VoiceOver visits it. VoiceOver announces what it is. Then the user, in this case, would
be using the keyboard. They can press it. VoiceOver tells them what they did. The click
event is routed back to the UI element and something happens. Cool. You might be thinking,
well, I'm not developing that. Turns out it's pretty similar on the web. So, in the browser,
and browsers vary from in terms of what they do, this pretty much goes to the DOM, the document
object model, the tree that is created for us. And what screen readers see is controlled by their
accessible written internet application roles. That's ARIA and the HTML. So, it's in parallel.
The tree is painted into a visual UI and transformed into an accessibility tree,
which varies by browser, which is then read via the native API for the assistive technology and
brought to the user. So, this is, like, not a simple thing to solve. And yeah. Cool. All right.
So, now I'll talk a little bit about what I learned from using the accessibility module.
This is a chart that I created in our using high charter. I'm not showing you the code because it's
super long, but don't worry. It's in the source documents. It's navigable by keyboard. I can
export. I have an annotation. And yeah. All right. So, what's the magic here? Here's where some of
the screen reader cool stuff comes in. And Maya, I think, mentioned this before with Twitter. So,
if you go and you inspect the HTML for this, it's actually created a hidden screen reader region
that if you look at, it's ARIA hidden equals false. So, that means that it's visible to a
screen reader. And then there are other regions of the chart that are hidden, but it is visually
hidden to a user who's looking at a visual representation. And then this back from that
first article, this is where Ted and the developers added the structure description of a chart that
could benefit screen reader users, such as the chart type, access information, which is partially
automatically generated and a long description of what's found in the chart provided by the creator.
So, again, it's not one size fits all, right? Part of what they found was that users,
they wanted not to have to go through every element in order to get the description. Or
they wanted to be able to skip certain elements early on. And this is a case where you have
two different ways of accessing similar information that accommodates different users.
So, the default format for that screen reader section is... So, the chart title, basically,
the type description, what kind of chart it is, chart subtitle, chart long description.
I will get back to that in a moment. Apply a sound button if you have soundification
disabled. The view table button, can you see me highlighting? Oh, God, what just happened?
Sorry. I can see it. Yep.
Cool. I'm glad you can see it. Now I'm back so far. And I'm sorry if anybody's motion sensitive.
Close your eyes. I'll tell you when it's back. All right. So, that view table button
comes up pretty quickly. And that's because for simple data structures, a lot of people
preferred that. And the chart long description, some people don't like that. And there's an easy
way for them to skip it. So, again, making different affordances for different personas.
So, for that penguins chart I showed you before, what does my screen reader section look like?
Again, title and chart info. Flipper length versus bill length. That's the title that I entered.
And it tells you what kind of chart it is, a scatter chart, how many data series, three.
And then a subtitle that I added myself. Axis descriptions and ranges.
This is a combination of auto generation and user generation. So, for example,
when I wrote this code, I the X axis description, I specifically wrote out displaying flipper length
in millimeters knowing that it would be in this special area. And that they would be able to then
skip the X axis description elsewhere. The range can either be automatically generated,
which is what I did in this case, or the developer, the creator can write it in there.
Sometimes it can't be automatically generated because let's say it's categorical. You're going
to be like range from broccoli to carrots. It's not a good example, but that's what I'm thinking.
And then the annotations. And this is a big deal that I didn't really know about. And I'm showing
you an example that just has one annotation, but there's another one in the blog post that has lots
of them, is that the chart annotation summaries come up. Because often with annotations, we're
saying what the most important information is. So, it says some stuff is what you write into.
Sorry. Horizontal scrolling is great. So, you write in your annotation, but it also is using
information from the data points. So, flipper length, that's the X axis of this length and the
Y axis of this length. That can be automatically generated. So, a combination of human and
technology working together. All right. So, I skipped over the chart long description before,
where you are most irreplaceable. You're not irreplaceable at any point. But this is where
you can say more. And what belongs there? Well, it depends. And it depends on what? Well, a couple
of things. One is both the intention of the chart. So, what you're trying to convey. And it depends
on whom you ask. So, in the user studies, as I mentioned before, they found that it was important
that it be skippable. But in some other research, which wasn't done by high charts that came out,
oh, what belongs there in general? A text summary of the visualization, making sure to describe
trends or patterns in the visualization. But different kinds of description contain different
kinds of content. And this was a study done recently about a four level model of semantic
content in different descriptions. These four levels, the first one is kind of the stuff that I
covered automatically. So, the elemental and the encoded properties, that's things like title,
legend, chart type, what are the ranges? Second level was statistical concepts and relations. So,
things like computable descriptive statistics. And now, as there's statisticians here,
you might start to think, like, wow, I definitely don't want a computer automatically saying
the descriptive statistics that are the wrong statistics for the kind of
for the distribution I'm showing. You know, you can see how human intervention would be useful
there. The third level was perceptual and cognitive phenomena, which basically means
stuff conveying kind of the overall gist of complex trends and patterns, exceptions, outliers.
And then the fourth level was contextual and domain specific insights. So, like, social and
political explanations for trends and stuff that depends on an individual's reader's subjective
knowledge. And some of the interesting takeaways from this study were that description, so,
the study was done with both blind and sighted reader groups. And they found that descriptions
are important to both blind and sighted reader groups. But that those reader groups differ,
almost diverged, significantly on which semantic content they ranked as most useful. So, not
everybody says that the same stuff is useful. And this was interesting to me, because there you're
really saying, like, okay, what you think as a sighted person might be most useful is might be
very different from what a blind user thinks. And then even within that, access to meaningful
information is strongly reader specific. All right. So, that was kind of, and I really, really
recommend you check out this paper. It's very, very good. Running out of time. So, lessons learned
through using this API. Use tools. They're great. I learned a ton from using this tool.
And stuff that I wouldn't have thought of. And different tools make different things easy or
harder. And you learn a lot. But don't rely on tools. So, there are limitations to technical
fixes. Accessibility isn't one size fits all. In fact, what helps one user could be a hindrance
to another. So, things like patterns for dual encoding can be really useful to some people and
can be really distracting or even harmful to others. And you need to make affordances for
those user preferences. Look to experts. There are people who are experts in this. But it is
kind of a nascent field. There aren't really great WCAG guidelines on semantics for things like SVG.
Get feedback. Get feedback from lots of different Maya covered this nicely. And keep learning. I
think that's one of the things I've learned. Literally since I did this, the high charts API
has changed and improved. And this it really is kind of a young area of study. So, these you can
access in my slides. These are has the R code and the working examples. The blog post series, which
if you're interested in, you can see them. Resources. The 10 guidelines for data
accessibility. One of the high charts core developers. That paper I mentioned earlier.
The accessible visualization via natural language descriptions. The data accessibility and advocacy
group has an ever growing collection of resources. This really great piece I read by a low vision
user who uses screen reader every day on alt text. It's really short and one of the best things I've
read about it. It was all these things I as a sighted user would never think of.
And then the ally project is a great meta resource for more resources. And then references. There
were a lot of them. And don't worry. You'll be able to scroll and see these. And also,
I can render it so they're larger. And that is it.
Thank you so much, Mara. Thank you for all those resources at the end, too. I know I shared the
slides earlier, but it might be helpful to reshare them in the chat right now, too.
They're no longer coming up. I just pasted it. Sorry.
Okay. Thank you. I see a few questions on Slido that have come through and in the Zoom chat.
But I do want to just bring everybody in to the conversation, too. So, I know this is kind of hard
on Zoom. But if you want to jump in and ask questions, too, you can raise your hand on Zoom.
Or I can call on you from the Zoom chat. We'd love to just learn from you all as well what
resources have been most helpful for you or other packages and things you want to share with people,
too. Mara, I see David had asked a question on Zoom. Does anyone know a way to add sonification
that isn't with high charts? And I think there were a few recommendations of packages, too.
I know there are ways. And they don't all use high charts. I think one of the
Let me get back to you on that. I haven't used the other ways. But there are other ways. And
that sonification studio isn't actually part of high charts. You can use it for
anything. I know there's an alternative way, too. Yeah, I think Riva shared Sonify and TuneR
packages that you can use. But, yeah, any other recommendations of packages, too, would be really
helpful. Let's see. I see, Zach, you have your hand raised. Do you want to jump in live?
Yeah, I can do. So, this one's for Maya. So, about the clicking on the Shiny app,
is that would I have I've kept a ggplot at the moment. Would I have to learn Plotly or is there
a ggplot way of doing it? Have to is a really funny thing. Yes, you have to. No, you can
totally use ggplot outputs. Again, it gets into, like, creating alt text for those outputs. And
I don't know if anyone has played around with or done research on, like, when you dynamically
create a plot in Shiny, also have alt text come along for the ride with it. I personally, like,
my journey geeking out into accessibility is very young, very green in the space. But I'm super
excited about trying to automate some level of description. Mara talked about the dangers in
doing that. But also, like, the baseline of having nothing. Like, it's better than that. So, there's
that gray area. Theoretically, if you render it as an SVG, then you could create events on those
SVGs if you made it so that you could focus on each one of those. Then you would have ARIA roles
that you would have to manually assign to them, saying how they were related back to the chart.
So, where they come from. And then the data that is there's no standard for this. But the data that
is with it. That's where I'm, like, huh. Boy, would it be easier if I had a tool that already
did this for me. Like, that's where I'm, like, I don't know how to do that. But it's possible.
Yeah. Because that's a big thing that I took away was, yeah, a lot of my, a lot of stuff I commented
on earlier. I use a red, amber, green. Because, of course, everyone uses a rag system. Red and
green aren't the most accessible for color blindness. That was a thing that I picked up on.
So, yeah. Thank you very much, both of you. But you can use text with that, too. Like,
for example, in the Shiny widget I had, if you picked, like, blue text on a blue background,
the box turned red. But under it, I had that with an X on it, you know? So, because that's, like,
traffic-lighty norm, you want to leverage things that people see in the real world,
but also you want, you can, like, how Mara talked about dual encoding, thinking about
just giving users, like, opting into different ways of interacting with the data.
Yeah. Thank you.
Thanks, Zach. I see Al, sorry, I'm not sure if that was your initials, on Zoom asks,
for a user who is blind or partially sighted and has never seen a scatter plot,
is it helpful to tell them that it's a scatter plot? What will they do with that information?
Also, how do these charts handle screen zoom or magnifying?
Yeah, so, high charts deals with zoom and magnifying. That's, like, another one of
their big features. And mobile. Again, I'm, like, great, I don't have to build anything like that.
And, yeah, so, that is actually in that paper on semantic content, one of the recommendations,
they're, like, here's where you could go into detail about what it means to be a scatter plot,
you know? And so, that's one option. And that's also where you kind of want to gauge your
audience. Is saying the chart type relevant? Well, if you've never seen it before,
if you have seen it before, I don't think that it might say something about how you'll end up
navigating it if you become familiar with it. So, for example, for a scatter plot, you're going to
want to be going between groups and zooming in. But, yeah, it's, like I've said many times before,
what's useful for one user isn't necessarily useful for another one, so.
Just adding to that, too, if you, like, let's say we have radio buttons where the user can
toggle between seeing a scatter plot or a line plot, then you need some indicator for an ARIA
role that that, okay, I'm seeing the thing that I clicked in the other thing, you know? So,
it just ties, it could tie it back in that way, too.
Great. Thank you. I see Caleb had asked on Zoom earlier, is the annotate function built into ggplot?
I think that was during your talk, Maya. Yeah, there's a million packages that people that are
smarter than me have written, as well. Like, there's, it's escaping me. I'm sure someone could
throw it in the chat. Like, a labeler that will label all your points, and you can even set, like,
if-else statements to only label things you care about.
Ggplot, right, yeah.
Thank you. And there's, and gglabeler. There you go.
I was going to write that in the chat, because someone shared a link to that,
so we just remember to share it later. I'm also going to stop the recording right now,
too, if people want to just, like, jump in the conversation, and that would make people feel
more comfortable, too. But let me stop that. But thanks, all.